blog: add post about gardener/inventory (#697)
gardener/documentation: website/blog/2025/08/08-13-keeping-track-of-your-resources-with-inventory.md

---

> title: Keeping track of your cloud resources with Gardener Inventory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Keeping Track of Your Cloud Resources with Gardener Inventory
```

> linkTitle: Keeping track of your cloud resources with Gardener Inventory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linkTitle: Keeping Track of Your Cloud Resources with Gardener Inventory
```

newsSubtitle: Aug 13, 2025
publishdate: 2025-08-13
authors:
- avatar: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/dnaeon
  email: dnaeon@gmail.com
  login: dnaeon
  name: Marin Atanasov Nikolov
aliases: [/blog/2025/08/13/getting-started-with-gardener-inventory]
---

> Running Kubernetes clusters at scale comes with it's own challenges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running Kubernetes clusters at scale comes with its own challenges.
```

How do you keep track of the resources under your control? How can you tell if a

> resource has become orphan and start adding up to your monthly cloud cost?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resource has become orphaned and has started adding up to your monthly cloud cost?
```

This post introduces [gardener/inventory](https://github.com/gardener/inventory)
and shows how the Gardener project keeps track of the cloud resources it manages

> in the various cloud providers such as GCP, AWS, Azure and OpenStack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the various cloud providers such as GCP, AWS, Azure, and OpenStack.
```

> It will also show how we can identify orphan resources through a simple, yet
> effective mechanism by collecting and reporting from the respective cloud
> providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will also show how we can identify orphaned resources through a simple, yet
effective mechanism, by collecting and reporting from the respective cloud
providers.
```

## What is Gardener Inventory?

> The Gardener Inventory is a system, which collects resources from various data
> sources, which are then persisted in a database, and relationships are
> established between the collected resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Gardener Inventory is a system that collects resources from various data 
sources and persists them in a database, establishing relationships between 
the collected resources.
```

The collected data can be later analyzed to show the relationship and
dependencies between the various resources.

The diagram below provides a high-level overview of the data model for the
Inventory system.

![Inventory Data Model High Level Overview](./images/inventory/data-model.svg)

> Each Gardener resource tracked by Inventory is mapped to it's corresponding
> hyperscaler resource, e.g. a `Machine` resource on the Gardener side maps to a
> virtual machine instance in GCP, AWS, Azure or OpenStack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Gardener resource tracked by Inventory is mapped to its corresponding
hyperscaler resource, e.g., a `Machine` resource on the Gardener side maps to a
virtual machine instance in GCP, AWS, Azure or OpenStack.
```

This allows us to ask different questions to the system:

- Do all my hyperscaler virtual machines map to a Gardener Machine?
- Do I have any unknown hyperscaler virtual machines?
- etc.

For more details about the design, please refer to the [Design
Goals](https://github.com/gardener/inventory/blob/main/docs/design.md) document.

## How does resource collection work?

This diagram shows a high-level overview of the collection mechanism implemented
by Inventory.

![Inventory Collection Flow](./images/inventory/collection-flow.svg)

The Inventory `scheduler` is responsible for enqueuing tasks on regular basis to
a message queue. These tasks are then consumed and processed by the Inventory
`workers`. Each task is self-contained and independent from the rest of the
tasks in the system.

> With this approach that means that a single task failure does not affect any of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this approach, that means that a single task failure does not affect any of
```

the other tasks in the system. That also means that we can run collection of

> different resources at the same time (e.g. EC2 instances, VPCs, buckets, etc.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different resources at the same time (e.g., EC2 instances, VPCs, buckets, etc.)
```

and let the system take care of the automatic retry and recovery for us.

This is a typical [Event-driven architecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Event-driven_architecture).

Another benefit of this architecture is that we can assign priorities for our

> tasks, e.g. we may want to prioritize collection of virtual machines over

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tasks, e.g., we may want to prioritize collection of virtual machines over
```

anything else.

## Requirements

> In order to build and start using Inventory locally you would need:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to build and start using Inventory locally, you would need:
```

- Go 1.24.x
- Docker

When running Inventory locally it is recommended that you use the provided
[docker-compose.yaml](https://github.com/gardener/inventory/blob/main/docker-compose.yaml)
manifest, which will start up all services for you. In order to start the

> services locally, first clone the `gardener/inventory` repo and then run this
> command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
services locally, first clone the `gardener/inventory` repo and then run the
following command:
```

``` shell
make docker-compose-up
```

Alternatively, you can build the `inventory` CLI locally by using the `build`

> makefile target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
makefile target:
```

``` shell
time=2025-08-08T13:41:20.650+03:00 level=INFO msg="received task" task_id=0afa4bc2-d8f1-48d3-b7a9-351fc627b168 task_queue=default task_name=g:task:collect-projects
time=2025-08-08T13:41:20.650+03:00 level=INFO msg="collecting Gardener project" task_id=0afa4bc2-d8f1-48d3-b7a9-351fc627b168 task_queue=default task_name=g:task:collect-projects project=my-project-name
time=2025-08-08T13:41:20.858+03:00 level=INFO msg="populated gardener projects" task_id=0afa4bc2-d8f1-48d3-b7a9-351fc627b168 task_queue=default task_name=g:task:collect-projects count=1
time=2025-08-08T13:41:20.864+03:00 level=INFO msg="populated gardener project members" task_id=0afa4bc2-d8f1-48d3-b7a9-351fc627b168 task_queue=default task_name=g:task:collect-projects count=2
time=2025-08-08T13:41:20.864+03:00 level=INFO msg="task finished" task_id=0afa4bc2-d8f1-48d3-b7a9-351fc627b168 task_queue=default task_name=g:task:collect-projects duration=213.589417ms
```

In order to collect all shoots from all known projects we can invoke the
`g:task:collect-shoots` task, e.g.

``` shell
$ inventory task submit --task g:task:collect-shoots
```

> Notice that we haven't specified any payload for this task. What Inventory does
> in this case is that it uses the already known Gardener Projects and will
> internally enqueue tasks for each of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that we haven't specified any payload for this task. In this case,
Inventory uses the already known Gardener projects and internally enqueues tasks for each of them.
```

This mechanism allows Inventory to perform dynamic task enqueuing based on
already collected data, such as the project we've collected in the previous
step. In other words -- already known top-level resources allow dynamic
collection of other sub-resources, as is the case with the `shoots` from this
example.

> The same mechanism is used for other datasources. For example collecting AWS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same mechanism is used for other data sources. For example, collecting AWS
```

regions enables the sub-sequent collection of all VPCs from these regions, which
in turn enable collection of all EC2 instances, subnets, etc. from the
discovered VPCs.

> [!NOTE]
> The `inventory task submit` command is usually used for running ad-hoc tasks.

> > In production environments these tasks and their respective payloads will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In production environments, these tasks and their respective payloads will be
```

> enqueued by the Inventory Scheduler instead.

> ## Monitoring and reporting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Monitoring and Reporting
```

> Querying collected data may be done either via SQL queries against the database,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Querying collected data may be done either via SQL queries against the database
```

or via the `inventory model query` sub-command.

This example shows how to generate a simple report of the collected AWS
instances using a [text/template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template) provided to
the `inventory` CLI.

``` shell
$ inventory model query \
    --model aws:model:instance \
    --template '{{ range . }}{{ printf "%s is %s\n" .Name .State}}{{end}}'
```

Example output:

``` shell
shoot--foo--worker-a-z1-996c4-rbwtz is running
shoot--bar--worker-hln3f-z2-6d5fb-mxv6d is running
shoot--baz--worker-qlbgk-z1-b67b7-t56wt is terminated
```

The `inventory model query` command also understands relationships between

> resources, which allows us to generate more complex reports by loading resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resources, which allows us to generate more complex reports by loading resources,
```

as well as any related to them resources.

> This command for example can be used to generate a report of the collected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command, for example, can be used to generate a report of the collected
```

Gardener `Project` resources, but also loads the `Shoot` and `Member`
relationships, allowing us to report on related data.

``` shell
inventory model query \
    --model g:model:project \
    --relation Shoots \
    --relation Members \
    --template-file gardener-projects-report.tmpl
```

Additional examples on how to query the data in Inventory by using SQL queries

> or the CLI can be found in the following documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or the CLI can be found in the following documents:
```

- [Database Queries](https://github.com/gardener/inventory/blob/main/docs/db-queries.md)
- [Querying Models](https://github.com/gardener/inventory/blob/main/docs/ops-guide.md#querying-models)

The provided
[docker-compose.yaml](https://github.com/gardener/inventory/blob/main/docker-compose.yaml)
also comes with a [pgadmin](https://www.pgadmin.org/) service, which you can use
to query and inspect the schema, which is handy when you need to familiarize
yourself with the existing schema.

![Inventory AWS Schema](./images/inventory/aws-schema.png)

> In order to get better insights of the data collected by Inventory you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to get better insights of the data collected by Inventory, you can
```

connect your Inventory database with [Metabase](https://www.metabase.com/),
[Grafana](https://grafana.com/) or [Apache Superset](https://superset.apache.org/).

This would make it possible to create nice reports and provide various
dashboards for your users, if needed.

> Additionally, you may want to connect the Inventory database with your [ITSM
> system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IT_service_management), if needed. That
> way Inventory can be used to enable various IT processes, if there is such a
> need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, you may want to connect the Inventory database with your [ITSM
system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IT_service_management). That
way Inventory can be used to enable various IT processes, if needed.
```

> Besides the data collected from various datasources Inventory exposes metrics
> about it's inner workings, which can be scraped for example by
> [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and alerted on as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides the data collected from various data sources, Inventory exposes metrics
about its inner workings, which can be scraped, for example, by
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and can also be used for alerting.
```

The following screenshot shows a summary of some of the data collected from a
Gardener landscape.

![Gardener Resources Summary](./images/inventory/gardener-stats.png)

This screenshot here displays a map of resources identified by Inventory as

> being orphan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
being orphaned.
```

![AWS leaked resources map](./images/inventory/aws-leaked-map.png)

> And here we can see some of the `worker` metrics showing us information about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And here we can see some of the `worker` metrics, showing us information about
```

the AWS-related tasks.

![Worker Metrics](./images/inventory/worker-metrics.png)

Hooking up Inventory with your alerting system allows for early notification of
orphan resources as soon as they are being discovered. Here we can see Inventory

> posting an alert about orphan EC2 instances in Slack.

Reviewer: Hooking up Inventory with your alerting system allows for early notification of
orphaned resources as soon as they are discovered. Here, we can see Inventory
posting an alert about orphaned EC2 instances in Slack.

![Slack Alert](./images/inventory/slack-alert.png)

> Ever since our team started using Inventory for tracking our hyperscaler
> resources we have identified a significant number of virtual machines, which
> have been long forgotten and unused, a.k.a orphan VMs. Besides virtual machines,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ever since our team started using Inventory to track our hyperscaler
resources, we have identified a significant number of virtual machines
that have long been forgotten and unused, a.k.a orphaned VMs. Besides virtual machines,
```
